>> Richard Feldman: So this is going to
be the beginning of our type checking
adventure.
There's gonna be multiple sections on
type checking, parts three through six.
And basically,
this is gonna be the absolute bare bones,
most basic, most straightforward
kind of type checking you can do.
You may have some questions as we go
about, well, wait, what about this?
What about that?
Don't worry, we're gonna get to those,
but we're gonna start off with something
really, really basic so that we can get
really the foundational idea of what style
of type checking we're doing and
what the basic mechanism of it is.
So this one's gonna be relatively short,
but
it's very important to understand
this foundational concept.
So we're not gonna put any
more stuff after it and
just move on to the next part.
Okay, so first we're gonna talk about type
variables, or as we're gonna call them,
type IDs, but typically, you see
a compiler, they'll talk about as type
variables, which will make more
sense when we get to polymorphism.
Type relationships, and
finally, path compression.
All right, so, I mentioned in
the beginning of the workshop that we
are doing Hindley-Milner type inference,
this is how you spell Hindley Miller.
If you're ever wondering, this is named
after two famous computer scientists,
Hindley and Milner.
Robin Milner is famous for
all sorts of things, Hindley, I think,
is mainly just famous for this algorithm.
There's also, you might see
Damas-Hindley-Milner, or DMS for short,
because Damas got involved later.
But usually, the most common way that I
hear people refer to this style of type
checking is Hindley Milner.
So why are we using it in this course?
Well, first off, it's a real-world
production like type inference system.
It's not just like a toy thing.
This is used by production
languages like Elm, Haskell, Rock,
basically the typed functional programming
languages tend to use Hindley- Milner
type inference among languages that
seal real-world production use.
So it's not the most popular way to do it,
but does have a lot of nice properties.
And in some cases, people will say, I wish
that the language that I were using were
using Hindley-Milner inference, because
it does have some very nice properties,
such as, it has a simple type system.
Now, the word simple can mean a lot
of different things to a lot of
different people.
In this case, what I mean basically is
that, you don't have subtyping to deal
with, which means you don't have to
worry about covariance, contravariance,
or any of the other
implications of subtyping.
Now, subtyping can be quite nice for
ergonomics, in some cases,
it can be something where you
kind of expect something to work,
and then if you have a subtyping
type checker or type system,
it just works the way
that you expect it to.
And the fact that Hindley-Milner is not
a subtyping type system generally tends to
mean that you might have some language
features that you would find in other
languages that you don't find
the languages that have this.
So for example,
go interfaces would be an example this,
that's a subtyping thing where you say,
I'm defining this interface, and
anybody who matches this interface
can just instantly use this function.
Call this function without needing
to change my types in any way or
add any type variables or
anything like that.
There are ways you can be equally
flexible, but in Hindley-Milner you
usually end up incorporating a type
variable to do that level of flexibility.
Whereas if you have subtyping,
you don't need to put a type variable or
a type parameter in your type annotation.
So Hindley-Milner type inference, or
at least a lot of languages that use
Hindley-Milner tend to
be sound meaning there,
there is no concept in the language
of a runtime tight mismatch.
So an example of a runtime
tight mismatch would be,
you're coming along in your JavaScript
code and you call a function, but
it wasn't a function,
it was a string for some reason.
And you get a tight mismatch
at runtime that was like,
I'm trying to call a string,
you can't do that, you can't call strings,
you can only call functions.
And somehow you got a string here in this
variable that you thought was a function,
but actually at runtime, it wasn't.
So a sound type checker is one where,
before the program runs,
it tells you about every single
instance of things like that.
There is no such thing in this
language as a runtime type mismatch,
as we'll see when we
get to code generation.
There isn't even code that could report
one, because there's just not a thing.
[LAUGH] So that's a very nice
property of these languages,
a lot of production type
checkers today are not sound.
Java is not sound, TypeScript is
famously intentionally unsound.
I think Java had some soundness holes that
they found that were not intentional,
I think having to do with reflection.
But basically, it is possible to write
a Java program in a way where you get
runtime type mismatches that
the compiler didn't catch.
TypeScript was intentionally unsound
because they wanted to cover
a very wide range of existing
JavaScript code bases.
Including some that are using things that
essentially were either impossible or
at least impractical to be able to
catch type mismatches at compile time.
Hindley-Milner type
inference is decidable, and
what decidable means is that,
it can figure out,
it can infer all of the types for
your program, all of them.
You do not need to write type annotations.
And in fact, in this workshop,
just to emphasize this,
I made type annotations
essentially in afterthought.
So the very last thing at the very end of
all the type checking sections that we do
is we just kinda sneak type annotations in
there and talk about how they work, and
then that's it.
So by the time we get to them, we've
already made everything else work just
using type inference with no annotations.
It's all sound, it's all decidable,
and it all just works.
It's also polymorphic, so
that means that it can support generics.
So we will get to things like you can say,
I have an array of strings or
I have an array of numbers, and
that is like that type variable,
that type parameter thing that, a lot
of languages, again, going back to Go.
For a long time, Go didn't have generics,
and this was like a famous Hello Blue, and
then eventually, they added generics.
And when they what they added were
the form of generics known as parametric
polymorphism, which is exactly the type
of thing that we're doing here.
And parametric polymorphism is basically,
some people use it interchangeably
with the term generics, although
generics usually has a little bit more
of an object-oriented connotation to it.
Parametric polymorphism is
just like the most general,
you got type parameters now,
[LAUGH] and they're a thing.
And that's what we're doing here, that's
what all the functional languages that
use Hindley-Milner Inference use,
and it works great.
Question?
>> Speaker 2: Yeah, I was curious
about the sound, I guess, type system.
Is there a performance penalty,
either at runtime or maybe a memory,
a penalty that is incurred by
having a system like that?
>> Richard Feldman: It's
actually the opposite.
There's a performance penalty incurred
by having an unsound type system,
at least if you wanna have
an unsound type system,
where when you get the types wrong,
you got a crash at runtime.
If you're okay with having undefined
behavior at runtime, then you can have
an unsound type system like assembly
language would be a good example of this.
Where if you mix up your types in assembly
language at runtime, you get, who knows?
Could be anything.
You're telling the CPU to add two things
together that you thought were integers,
but actually, it's adding two memory
addresses of strings together.
Now the ones and
zeros just, who knows what?
And you're just gonna get all sorts
of wild unpredictable behavior.
It's much better to get a runtime
type mismatch than that,
[LAUGH] an actual error that stops your
program or gives you a stack trace and
stuff like that, but
you have to pay for that.
So basically if you want to allow
gracefully recoverable runtime type
mismatches.
Then that requires, essentially, every
single thing that you are taking through
your program needs to end up having
some runtime metadata about,
here's what my real type is.
But if you don't have that requirement,
and you're not otherwise wanting that for
runtime type reflection or something like
that, then you have the option of doing
what Rust does and C++ does,
at least by default.
And what Rock does, which is basically,
you can say we have no overhead at
runtime, we don't even
keep the types around.
We have no idea what
the types are at runtime,
because we know that we got
them all right at compile time.
So yeah, definitely at least potential
performance benefit, unless you want, for
other reasons to keep around
the runtime type information.
>> Speaker 2: Thank you, and
just quick follow up too,
cuz I was thinking about in
the context of TypeScript.
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: We kind of provide
that runtime type safety using
type guards and stuff like that.
So that's why I was kind of curious
if there's a performance penalty
in that case.
But it's different when you're-
>> Richard Feldman: I see what you're
saying, yeah, I mean, TypeScript,
because it compiles to JavaScript,
JavaScript's already keeping all
that information around at runtime.
You're paying for it no matter what,
so they might as well use it [LAUGH].
>> Speaker 2: Right, got it,
that makes sense, thank you.